This repository contains data, code and supplementary materials for the following paper:

Turn-Taking Dynamics in Child-Adult Conversations Across Social Contexts: A Comparative Study of Autistic and Typically Developing Children

Abstract:

Verbal conversations involve promptly responding to each other in a way that is appropriate to the social context. In this study, we disentangled different dimensions of turn-taking by investigating how the dynamics of child-adult interactions changed according to the activity (task-oriented versus freer conversation) and the familiarity of the interlocutor (familiar versus unfamiliar). The procedure involved 28 autistic children (16 male; mean age=10.8 ± 3.2 years) and 20 age-matched typically developing children (8 male; mean age=9.6 ± 3 years). Each child participated in 7 face-to-face, task-orientated conversations with their caregivers (330 sessions) as well as 7 more affiliative telephone conversations alternately with their caregivers (144 sessions, 60 typical development sessions) and an experimenter (192 sessions, 112 autism sessions). By modelling inter-turn response latencies in multi-level Bayesian location-scale models to include long tails, we found good test-rest reliability across sessions and contexts, and showed that context - familiarity in particular - strongly shaped group differences in response latencies. Autistic children exhibited more overlaps, produced faster response latencies and shorter pauses than than typically developing children – and these group differences were particularly salient when conversing with the unfamiliar interlocutor. Unfamiliarity also made the relation between individual differences and latencies evident: only in conversations with the experimenter were higher socio-cognitive skills, lower social motivation and lower social awareness associated with faster responses. Information flow and shared tempo were also influenced by familiarity: children adapted their response latencies to the predictability and tempo of their interlocutor's turn, but only when interacting with their caregiver and not the experimenter. We argue that these results highlight the need to construe turn-taking as immersed in a multi-dimensional social context that creates different affordances for communicative patterns.

OSF link: https://osf.io/qhdzm/
